---
Title: "Operant Ecology - Media as a Formal Cause"
Original Draft Date: 2023-03-10
Last Revised: 2023-05-02
Status: Processed
Related File: "[Mcluhan and Skinner](../Raw/McLuhan%20and%20Skinner.md)"
---

We are here considering how changes in communications technologies could bring about changes in the 'texture' of human perception—or in this case, changes in practices of visual attention, which could subsequently affect conscious experience of perceptual schema. As regards the mechanism of this change,

I propose to examine the secondary effects of literacy through a lens which combines media ecology with behavioral analysis.

Marshall McLuhan looked to media as a formal cause: the various forms of thought, the structure of our lives, was determined in large part by the media we lived amid, and more especially by the communications media we lived amid. The various properties of these media shaped our sensorium and our society.

What McLuhan and media theorists like Postman are missing is, ultimately, a theory of learning. I propose we take the very simplest theory which still respects the complexity of ecological perception.

We see that, through an even a provisional application of behavioral analysis—and especially operant conditioning—to media ecology, that the ‘outsized effects’ posited by McLuhan are, while impressionistic, amply accounted for, and even inevitable once the basic mechanism is accounted for.

Older media ecology, per Postman’s description of it and the bacterium, focused on the ‘medium’ as the material container of the organism. Thus in some sense Umberto Eco is able to lampoon them because it is ridiculous to think that once you plunk someone down in water they are able to swim, for instance. Rather, they drown. What they seemed to need to spell out more is that the new technology (which usually is created through a sort of happenstance, a series of gradual changes which suddenly amount to a phase transition, within which the new tech is the emergent phenomenon—cf. gradual evolution of printer through its disparate parts, which then suddenly came together and saw an explosive proliferation), **because it expedites or optimizes some dimension of the processing of either energy, matter, or information**, proliferates throughout the human artifice and rapidly and profoundly alters the human environment. The different changes which media ecologists claim are ‘caused’ by new technologies are in fact _adaptive responses_ to _transformed environments._

To put this in context. The clock required certain types of gears (and thus the metals to produce them), information (about how to produce the gears, and how to mine the metals, and how to produce the wires), and energy (mechanical, spring-like) which developed independently of one another. The great discovery, one assumes, was the synchrony of the wound clock with the sundial—that the ‘unwinding’ could occur at predictable speeds which could be synchronized within and across whole communities, thus creating a sort of uniformity both of behavior and of experience. It also causes people to think more about uniformity, to be steeped in a sort of visual uniformity, and changes peoples’ relationship to time.

Accordingly, it is not the invention of the clock which ‘causes’ people emphasize visual uniformity and segment time into uniform units. Rather, the tendency to emphasize visual uniformity and segment time into uniform units is a _consequence of_ and _adaptive response to_ the proliferation and widespread implementation of the clock mechanism.

This is important: People will adopt a new technology—something which improves either information processing, material processing, or lowers or regularizes energy use—before they are able to use it. We see this _constantly_ today, where people will go out of their way to employ new technologies, the infrastructure for which does not currently exist and therefore the use of which is rather inconvenient (biohackers, who would place RFID chips in their skin, are an excellent example of this—they do this not because of, but in anticipation of the existence of an internet of things; however, the internet of things also needed to advance to a certain stage before biohackers could come into existence).

It seems that what media ecology lacks is a theory of learning (or mechanism of learning) that could account for the profound changes it imagines are brought about by changes in communication technologies. Rather than new media directly 'causing' changes in human experience, perception, and cognition, I suspect that new media change the human environment, and then human perceptual, cognitive and physical behavior are reshaped through interacting with the changed environment. This is a very simple distinction, but I think it is greatly simplifying and allows for a more straightforward and empirical approach to media ecology. Because the fact that media theorists like McLuhan and Postman were largely proven correct by the way events unfolded warrants our attention, but the lack of any learning mechanism makes it almost impossible to test or operationalize or, really, share with others. I do not think all learning is operant conditioning: I think that other types of learning can occur either as relates to the device itself (book use, phone use, etc.) or to the content of the medium in question. However, I do think that the changes which result from transformations of the environment in radical ways—especially changes which significantly alter the contingencies of reinforcement available across a given human landscape—are probably accomplished through a form of operant conditioning. I do not, also, think that it is mainly the body which is thus conditioned, but attention—how we pay attention, what we attend to, why we attend to it. Each medium gives its pellets, as it were, in different ways, emphasizing different forms and modes of interaction.

**My hypothesis is that new communications technologies fundamentally transform the loci of interactivity in a given human environment. By simply creating a new locus of interactivity, each new technology invariably occasions an intensive process of operant conditioning.** This interaction should be conceived as a form of operant emission, components of which will be selectively reinforced by contingencies derivative of the structure, form and content of the communications medium/object (e.g. a book) and its message (e.g. the text). Any new tech or device—be it the printed book or the smartphone—would function here as operant conditioning chambers which shape behavior through contingencies of reinforcement (and schedules of reinforcement) intrinsic to the structure, function and content of the new technology. This seems to follow logically from the nature of operant omissions and the fact that communications media are hubs of maximal interactivity within any given human environment.

I am looking right now at ways of measuring the loci of interactivity within different environments. At core it's actually just a matter of measuring the differential distribution of human cognitive and behavioral attention across a given environment. I have looked at interactivity in communications, organizational design, product design, and video game/vr contexts. The argument is rather straightforward. The more reactive a part of the environment is—the more that interaction with it provides reinforcement of any number of kinds—the more likely it is to shape and change behavior through reinforcement learning. If there's an environment, and the pigeon is motivated, and there is a way of acquiring a reinforcer in the environment—if the pigeon finds the reinforcer, its behavior will begin to be shaped by the acquisition of the reinforcer. Now, with humans, we have people who tell us where to find the reinforcers. We know where the level is and what it does. We learn how to use it, then we teach others so they can use it. This is assuming they have areas with levers as well. If not, we will sometimes start manufacturing and distributing operant conditioning chambers because we imagine it streamlines pellet acquisition overall.

I am arguing that new communications technologies do not necessarily directly condition cognitive, perceptual or physical behavior at scale. Rather, they change the locus of interactivity—the most attended to, reactive elements in an observer's environment—within a given environment, and thus radically change the contingencies of reinforcement available in the environment. Sometimes these new technologies also become the loci of interactivity, in which case they do directly condition behavior. In other cases, they merely displace the existing loci and clear the space for new loci to emerge.

For instance: the invention of writing centralizes the control system for a human collective, and thus makes the physical and natural environment less interactive and dynamic, as it helps to create manageable, uniform, predictable throughputs for food production which operate according to non-local directives. Now, you could analyze this in a number of ways, and how exactly the loci of interactivity change, but for the sake of this brief message, let this stand as one end of a spectrum of the possible consequences of new tech changing the loci of interactivity. On the other end of the spectrum, you have cases like print typography or natural language programs where the new information technologies not only displace old loci, but the tech themselves become the new loci. Thus, the formal and perceptual properties of the system shape perceptual, cognitive and physical behavior, while transformations to the range and nature of messages the new tech is capable of sending also has an overall effect.

I am curious about investigating what I call 'cognitive' behaviors in humans. I think there is a very similar dynamic at work—there are 'perceptual emissions' (we see this in how, e.g., by staring at something, certain bizarre visual effects can start to occur), for instance, and I bet there are also something we could call perceptual reinforcers. This process is in a sense identical to the conditioning of an animal's attention so that it responds to e.g. a particular colored disk vs. disks of other colors, which was is a common practice in behavioralist laboratory work (and closely related to the process of bringing a conditioned behavior under the control of a specific stimulus). I am curious as to the specific class of reinforcers 'native' or 'intrinsic' to perception. For instance, I suspect that the successful decoding of a message encoded within a sensory array (for instance, from reading a printed word) is reinforcing. I am curious to close this space between externally observable whole-organism 'behavior' and this sort of cognitive or perceptual behavior. I believe that the very existence of successful 'self-learning' artificial neural networks in a sense offer proof-of-concept that reinforcement learning mechanisms operate on cognitive or perceptual behavior.

For instance, I believe that curiosity is a type of informational motivation, and the satisfaction of curiosity a reinforcer. Meanwhile, the means by which satisfaction of curiosity was achieved will be reinforced. The perceptual behavior will be reinforced (say, scanning a line of text within a uniform grid of alphabetic code, superimposed on an optic display, during which foveal inputs and letter form inputs will be amplified across the system, and other non-overlapping non-salient inputs inhibited), and the cognitive behavior will be reinforced (say, of decoding the text to extract the message, which involves the activation of pathways connecting the letterform area in the visual cortex to areas involved in semantic processing). I do think perceptual and cognitive culturally dependent differences at scale result from differences in how resources and reinforcers are accessed within these societies (not exclusively, or even directly, of course, but there should be a non-trivial association between certain human-environmental configurations and certain cognitive or behavioral traits).
