
It is the claim of this work that we are currently undergoing a widespread detextualization of language at a societal level. Its main premise is that, spurred on by the rapid advance in artificial intelligence and machine learning, the written interface will give way to forms of digitized speech mediated by AI models with natural language processing abilities. These models exist, this process is already well underway, and it only remains for us to understand how it happened, why it happened, and what we ought to do in response to this development.

What I mean is simply this: At those sites in our lives where until recently, we interacted with language in the form of text—of written, visible symbols—now, we will access that same language through the interface of some artificial intelligence model that can store language as code and deliver language as audible speech.

My question is what is lost and what is gained by the disappearance of textualized (written) language and its replacement by a largely audio-to-binary form of dissemination, creation, storage, processing, etc. facilitated by large language models and various forms of artificial intelligence. My main call to action: the current social structure is fundamentally reflective of the importance of textualized language—it is ordered to ensure the acquisition of orthographic literacy and the operation of a literate textualized society—with the consequences that, as textualized language recedes, so too will the adaptiveness of this structure. We need to rethink how we rear and socialize/educate our young. I think the biggest preventable negative impact of de-textualization will be through the loss of the secondary effects of fluent literacy, and the modes individual and social and political life these effects enable.

By “de-textualization” of language, I am referring to the ongoing shift away from 'writing' to other forms of language storage, processing and creation. For example: It is no longer necessary that we write down long compositions in order to store them. We can create audio files which will be stored as binary code, not as alphabetic code. We may not even need written language for programming or composition—natural language processing models could help cut the 'text' out of voice-to-text and go straight from voice to binary code. I could easily imagine a version of this where, instead of written language, natural language models serve as a new 'written' interface. It could take digitized audio files of spoken language and represent them visually or aurally (something like a digital workflow space already does). Obviously we are currently reliant on written language and will be for some time, but a future involving a nearly full de-textualization of language seems like a possibility for the first time I am aware of (at least, a possibility isn't also a regression into illiteracy and the ruination of our information-processing abilities and social complexity).

By a ‘post-literate, non-text-based forms of psychological, social and political organization,’ I am referring to the specific formations of personhood, sociability, and political organization enabled and shaped by the creation, replication, circulation, processing, and storage of textualized language. These formations are differently informed by these different aspects of textualized language.

1)    There is currently underway a comprehensive detextualization of human language.

2)    Accordingly, writing—at one time the exclusive, and then merely the preeminent, technology for the composition, dissemination, and storage of human language—will become increasingly marginal to the communication and information activities in complex industrialized societies.

For our purposes, the term “script” will designate what we usually call a ‘written language.’ To be more precise, let a “script” designate a finite set of discrete visual forms which, through a mapping of correspondences with the phonemic, syllabic, verbal, or conceptual elements of a human language, can be combined and sequenced to encode an indefinite range of possible utterances.

(Thus, the English alphabet is one example of a script. The Cyrillic alphabet could be another. The cuneiform wedge script, used to encode Sumerian and Akkadian, is another.)

We may refer to a string or sequence of elements from a script as “text,” and speak of the string itself as a “textual” object.

To encode language in text is to ‘textualize’ it. We may refer to the language encoded in the combinatorial sequence of elements from a script as “textualized” language.

Let the term “writing” designates that repertoire of perceptual, cognitive, and physical behaviors which enable, and are reciprocally reinforced by, the creation of textualized language.

This state of affairs—where language is encoded in, retrieved from, and encountered as _text_—can be referred to as the condition of ‘textualization.’ The repertoire of behaviors which enable, and are mutually reinforced, by reading and writing can also be considered an aspect of ‘textualization.’ In this sense, we might say that ‘textualization’ can also be considered a property or attribute of a given society, to the extent that the state of affairs characterized by the term ‘textualization’ obtains for the society in question.

Detextualization, then, refers to a transition away from textualization at a societal level. This means that, as detextualization advances, text ceases to be the primary means by which human language is composed, circulated, and stored. This also means that the physical, perceptual, and cognitive behaviors which enable the production, circulation, and storage of textualized language cease to be reinforced and maintained at strength by the contingencies obtaining in the society. Thus, writing becomes less important, and therefore its pursuit as an advanced craft becomes the vital but ultimately marginal preserve of a specialist cohort.  As text ceases to be the primary mode of composing, circulating, and storing language, text will of course cease to be the primary means of processing language. Accordingly, the fluent advanced literacy, and the suite of secondary effects which accompany its acquisition, becomes increasingly uncommon as detextualization advances.

Then, there are the larger structures—types of individuals, social identities, social distinctions—which the repertoires of behavior comprising reading and writing compel us to create. [etc.]

Finally—and perhaps, most importantly—to the extent that it remains focused on textualization, the vast social machinery devoted to the universal acquisition of fluent literacy, which includes universal public secondary education, becomes increasingly disconnected from the realities of the society into whose ranks we would seek to induce our young.


++

Certain writing systems dictate more explicitly than others their verbalizations. All writing systems, however, dictate their own verbalizations. In other words: not all systems visualize speech; but all scripts can be verbalized as speech and describe the contents of a script. Consider an abstract mathematical formulation for set theory. The list of operators will be defined alphabetically in terms of their operations. These are names we give to the operators, and verbal descriptions of the operators, just as we would provide for any entities in our visual environments.
